[Music]
hello everyone
dr scott barry kaufman my guest today is
a cognitive scientist
exploring the limits of human potential
he received his phd in cognitive science
from yale university
and has taught courses on intelligence
creativity and well-being at columbia
nyu the university of pennsylvania and
elsewhere he hosts a very popular
podcast
the psychology podcast and is author or
editor or co-editor of nine books
including his newest
transcend the new science of
self-actualization
published in 2020 and just out in
paperback
as of april of 2021 he wrote
wired to create unraveling the mysteries
of the creative mind with carolyn
gregoire in 2016 and
ungifted intelligence redefined in 2013
he's written major academic works as
well with robert sternberg
he co-edited the cambridge handbook of
intelligence in 2011 which is a major
academic text
he also edited the complexity of
greatness
in 2013 which brought together
leading scholars to discuss and debate
the relative contributions of biology
and society
in determining creativity in 2015 he was
named
one of 50 groundbreaking scientists who
are changing
the way we see the world by business
insider
dr kaufman thank you for coming on my
podcast
dr peterson it's great to be here i've
been looking forward to this chat
it's good to see you we actually have a
couple of publications together right
from a few years back and and so but
we've strangely enough never sat down
and had a
lengthy discussion so hopefully today
we'll have an opportunity to rectify
that so
first of all maybe you could tell
everyone just exactly
what a cognitive scientist is
well i think the important thing to
recognize about cognitive science is
it's an interdisciplinary field
so it doesn't just involve psychology
but it brings in philosophers and it
brings in
neuroscientists it brings in computer
scientists
to all kind of sit down at the table and
figure out what is the mind and what are
the functions of the
of the human mind what are the limits of
the human mind
how does the nervous system represent
mind so basically everything has to do
with mind but it's very
interdisciplinary and
that that's what really it was exciting
to me about it when i got into it i i
did my undergrad at carnegie mellon and
i did a computer science degree and i
did a cognitive science degree and it
was really exciting to me
to kind of figure out how all these
different things could be integrated
with each other
and how did a cognitive scientist who's
at least
technically more interested let's say in
the mechanics of thought
and and abstract cognition how did you
come to be interested in the humanist
tradition which is the focus of this
book which we're going to talk about in
fair detail today it isn't obvious that
those things have any
necessary interrelationship so what
happened
not at all obvious well so as a kid i
grew up with a real
deep fascination for understanding
individual differences i mean i remember
like just being a very young kid looking
on the playground and wondering why
someone could
so effortlessly go in the jungle gym and
why why i was so
awkward and and i also had some early
learning difficulties
that made me try to understand what the
only limits of my own limits of my own
potential were so the
the interest that got me to the field
was human intelligence
and um i realized after enough
years in the field and once my interest
brought into creativity which is the the
work we did together was on creativity
when i was in grad school
and then now self-actualization humanism
i realized that what i was really
interested in was
human potential not intelligence you
know intelligence i thought was
the be-all and end-all of human
potential and then what i've learned
come to realize you know throughout my
career is that um that wasn't
that was just the beginning well galton
francis galton
who in some sense pioneered the
psychometric study of iq
is also interested in human potential i
would say so
in some sense that's a return to the
source and it is easy to confuse
intelligence with well the whole range
of human talent and ability and
and differentiating all those different
concepts and and placing them in the
proper
uh relationship to one another and
identifying them for study is no trivial
thing
so you worked you worked
a fair bit on intelligence per se
so my junior year in college um i
was uh so curious about intelligence
that i cold emailed
nicholas mcintosh who was the head of
the department at university of
cambridge and i said
can i just take a year off my
undergraduate studies and just you teach
me everything about iq
will you teach me everything there is to
know about like um everything we've
known the last hundred years about
intelligence
and so he to my excitement he responded
my email he said sure
come over so i i packed my bags and went
to england
while i was and this didn't count as a
study abroad program there was no study
abroad program so i just
notified carnegie mellon i'm going off
dangling to study intelligence
and uh and it was just so exciting to me
to be able to learn how old were you
when you did that
20 years old probably and he responded
to a cold letter and invited you over
yeah i must have uh well there i think
that he
might have been oppressed with some of
that like i was herb simon's last
research assistant at that time as well
and um but i i felt like there were
limits to what i was understanding about
intelligence through the expertise
approach that i was learning from herb
simon
i felt as though i wasn't learning about
intelligence i was learning about
expertise acquisition and i didn't think
they would say exactly the same thing
so anyway um yeah so he must he must
have been impressed with my email i mean
i was a real
i was i was really uh
i'm trying to think of the word an
enterprising young man i don't know i'm
trying to think of the right word
you know i was like really excited to
learn this stuff curious and
enthusiastic
yeah i like that and obviously able to
communicate that so you went over to
england and you worked with a
psychometrician
and so you worked with someone who was
very interested in the formalities of
measurement
and careful definition of intelligence
what and
and what did you learn as a consequence
of doing that about intelligence
well i learned a bunch of things one one
important thing i learned is that
intelligence uh
has uh multiple general cognitive
mechanisms which contribute or give rise
to a general intelligence kind of uh
function um some you know there's this
debate in the field about whether or not
g or general intelligence is the thing
that is causal
of things in the world or if it's an
emergent property of things
and i learned a little bit about this
view that it's an emergent property of
these domain general mechanisms and the
biggest one which captivated my
attention was working memory
at that time and then that quickly led
to me doing uh
and being interested in differences in
sex different
sex differences in working memory um and
i came up with a hypothesis when i was
working with him in college about that
which then led me to getting uh studying
with him for a master's degree to
actually test that hypothesis
so let's walk over the psychometric view
a bit and i'll
say some of the things that i think i
know and you can tell me if
if they're out of date or if you're
convinced that they're erroneous in some
way so
essentially what the psychometricians
have discovered
is and established and i think more
credibly than any psychologists have
established any other phenomenon within
the field of psychology is that
there's a common mechanism or an
emergent property
that appears to characterize activity in
relationship to virtually any set of
abstractions
so if you if you put together a random
set of
questions that require abstraction to
solve
so they could be mathematical questions
or general knowledge or vocabulary
the sort of thing even that you might
encounter while playing trivial pursuit
if you put together a reasonable set of
those and then you
add up the correct scores and you rank
order them across all the people who've
taken that particular test you get
something that
is a pretty accurate estimate of iq
that's central tendency it's that
powerful and that's related to
long-term life success in
in in attainment let's say economic
attainment
and career attainment that accounts for
about 25
of the variation between people in the
differences in attainment
is that that that seem roughly anything
i would i would i would do like a yes
end if this was in problem
i would yes end and say a central
concept in this is the idea of the
positive manifold
because it's really interesting and this
was charles spearman's you know
discovery in 1904
it's interesting that people who tend to
do well on one of these kinds of tests
tend to do well on other of these kinds
of tests
and the thing which is why i thought the
expertise acquisition approach i was
learning in college didn't fully explain
is that we're talking even with um
lacking expertise
in in like these iq test items
abstraction like you mentioned
they're they're a lack of expertise and
yet they're positively correlated with
each other and it didn't have to be that
way right
right uh jordan because one could have
proposed well
the more you specialize in one thing the
worse you'll be in other things because
um you're devoting all your time and
attention to one thing
but instead we find that actually there
is there are some general cognitive
mechanisms that apply to any task
and even novel especially actually i
would say especially the novelty
yeah right because it's an it's it
actually predicts learning
new abstractions better than it predicts
real world performance
and we should also note that the level
of
predictive accuracy is stunning compared
to the predictive accuracy of virtually
anything
any social scientists have discovered
apart from iq
yeah i tweeted that out the other day i
said it's astounding to me when people
say
uh so matter-of-factly like iq tests are
invalid when it is probably the most
valid test we have in psychology and
that of course got a lot of comments
like
well that that therefore that just shows
your whole field of
and that's completely wrong because the
effect sizes in psychology
the the valid effect sizes are uh are
uh what would you call them impressive
when you compare psychology to other
disciplines of its
category of generalization say so the
idea that the whole field is nonsense is
is only put forth by people who don't
have differentiated understanding of the
field or of the social sciences that it
might be compared with the psychologists
are the most
um sophisticated methodologists by far
in all the social scientists
sciences as far as i'm concerned so yeah
there seems to be this misunderstanding
or this uh
expectation of psychology that we're
supposed to be perfectly reliable they
were supposed to
have perfect reliability of humans and i
don't think any psychologist has ever
claimed to to have that sort of level of
precision i mean of course
a lot of people are going to fall
between the cracks with these iq tests
um
and and i'm interested in those people
too i mean of course but i'm also
interested in the statistical
generalizations and the implications for
society i mean
you can hold both things in your mind at
one time yes well and you can also point
out that
accounting for 25 percent of the
variation in something as complex as
life attainment is unbelievably
impressive especially given how much
effect
random factors have on determining those
outcomes like
well like health for example like
physical and mental health and
well in situational variables like the
state of the economy
etc etc the availability of educational
resources across all that variability
you still get this incredibly impressive
prediction
of this single factor we could also
point out for everyone that
you know you might think that people
have good personalities and bad
personalities in some sense that's
unidimensional but if you do
the same statistical analysis with a set
of personality questions
that you would conduct on a set of
abstract questions
you get five factors not one so it isn't
it isn't necessarily the case at all
that
something will simplify down to a single
factor but that's profoundly the case
with iq the other thing that is worth
pointing out is that
bad as iq tests might be given that
there's much they don't explain
they're far better than any other method
we have of assessing
potential for uh let's say cognitive
growth and acquisition so if you want to
predict how well
someone's going to do in an academic
environment
then there isn't anything that even
comes close to the accuracy of an iq
test and also to the
unbiased it's also unbiased compared to
all other forms of measurement
so so okay so you learned this in
in in england but you weren't you
weren't satisfied with the
expertise approach and you
so you became a master of the
psychometric approach
and learned that literature but that
also didn't satisfy you
why not yeah so i
really and i felt this in my bones uh
just intuitively when i was
in college even sophomore year in
college i was reading i wrote the i read
the book successful intelligence by
robert sternberg
and i felt as though creativity wasn't
the same thing as intelligence i feel
like that was
this thing that i felt to be true that i
um you know i didn't know there was a
whole field
until i started reading um cognitive
psychology as well i took a course in
cognitive psychology my sophomore year
with anne fay and
and got to uh the the chapter on
intelligence in sternberg's textbook
where he talks about the the
psychological literature on creativity
and that really excited me and i um and
i felt like there was uh
there was more to the story than just iq
and by the way mcintosh would definitely
agree with that
he he unfortunately he passed away a
couple years ago but um you know if he
were a librarian he would definitely
agree completely with that and he has in
our conversations
um it's almost like um people uh import
ideas on iq researchers that they never
said you know like no iq researcher that
i ever know
have ever known has said like that iq is
a perfect predictor of everything right
you know
yeah quite the contrary they tend to be
extremely conservative in their
estimates
of iq's potential for prediction well
you're also in a strange position
intellectually unique position in some
sense because you worked with one of the
leading
psychometric scholars who helped develop
the idea of the general single factor of
intelligence iq essentially but you also
worked with robert sternberg who
was one of the people in the 90s in
particular
and in the 80s as well who mounted a
challenge to the idea of a unitary
intelligence i
i would say it was him and and howard
gardner
at the harvard school of of education
faculty of education
that started to develop theories of
multiple intelligence essentially and so
um well so what did you conclude as a
consequence of being exposed to both of
those sets of ideas
yeah and you're quite right it's a
really astute point i i just want to say
they had a great affection for each
other i remember we
we invited bob uh as we call robert
sternberg bob over to cambridge to give
a talk at
cambridge once i remember i saw all of
us walking in the garden me
nick and bob and uh and bob was
criticizing i remember this vividly bob
was criticizing neuroscience and saying
it's so reductionistic like it's showing
us nothing about intelligence and
and nick was we're pushing back but i
feel like there was a great affection
at the core among all of us um i think
that what i really
learned from all these perspectives is
that we need to stop thinking about all
this stuff in either or
terms and do a lot more integration
um in our thinking about these topics
which and i'm sure we're going to talk
about this when we get to the hierarchy
of needs because believe it or not this
is related
is that we need to be we need to think
of this stuff more in terms of
integrated hierarchies than in terms of
binaries or um or disparate constructs
that
are completely a contextual of each
other so
the more i got into it the more i
realized how the interesting questions
were when you
combine intelligence and creativity you
know when you combine and when you start
looking
at the world um so for instance i um i
published a paper um
with roger beatty who's a real leading
star in the neuroscience field
showing that both the executive
attention network and the default mode
network
which is more related to creativity or
imagination
when they are coupled together you see
the greatest uh
sources of creativity so it doesn't make
any sense to kind of view these things
as separate but each one do make their
unique contributions if that makes sense
okay so let's let's go back momentarily
to the
sternberg and psychometric debate so i
was
really interested and have remained
interested in measurement
um when i encountered all those ideas i
was trying to
predict uh success in complex
environments academic environments like
the university of toronto and harvard
and also in business environments
and i was trying to extend the
prediction that was capable with
iq and so i was scouring the literature
looking for reliably measurable
methods of assessing anything that would
predict
achievement and then also reliable
measures of achievement which which
is a separate problem but what i found
lacking with sternberg and gardner in
particular was that i could never derive
anything
of practical measurable utility from
their work
and and i couldn't find anything in it
that would allow me to
add to predictive validity now i also at
that time was studying
the big five personality factors and
that became quite clear that there was
something in that that was actually
measurable so to even to predict
academic performance if you use
iq essentially and the sat and lsat and
all those
standardized tests fall into that
category even though the makers deny
that quite frequently
they do conscientiousness is a good
additional predictor
and we looked at prediction of
performance in graduate school and
openness which is the creativity
dimension that we'll talk about didn't
predict at all it was actually slightly
negatively predicted with graduates
graduate school performance publications
and so on but
we did find that a combination of
neuropsychological tests
basically assessing executive function
could add something to iq maybe
depending on how you did the analysis
but conscientiousness definitely did
but i couldn't extract anything out of
the multiple intelligence literature and
so
and i always thought that was a fatal
flaw actually of that literature because
from a scientific perspective and i also
think from a reasonable
critical intellectual perspective if you
can't
extract out anything of measurable
value then what's the evidence what's
the evidence that you actually have
something other than something
conceptual
and so you must have run across the same
problem when you were trying to expand
out from iq
i did i'll be i'll be very blunt about
this um
i went into the field so excited about
theories of multiple intelligences
and once i started studying this
scientifically
i became seduced by the truth
i don't know i don't know how else to
say it how about horribly impacted by
the truth that was my
experience with iq it was like oh my god
this won't go away no matter what you do
and
it is solitary and it's been well
measured and it's really hard to add to
it
and everything else looks bad in
comparison it's it was quite a shock to
me
that's the thing so once i started um
studying this stuff with
with nick you know you you'd for
instance you would look at like people's
attempts to measure
gardner's multiple intelligences and in
every single instance you'd be able to
still extract a g
factor um and there were there's no
and i've come to the conclusion that as
long as you're
activating consciousness to any degree
whatsoever
you're going it's going to be g-loaded
what the task you're doing is going to
bring in working memory processes it's
going to bring in
some other uh like general associative
learning was another process we
introduced
um obviously the field has studied
associative learning but nick and i
published a paper showing
that we could adapt some of those
measures um that have been used in the
behavioral literature because nicholas
is uh most well known for his behavioral
research
we were able to adapt some of these
associated learning measures to predict
g
very uh just as well as working memory
for instance so we found there there's
there are these general cognitive
mechanisms that won't go away
like you could have whatever whatever
theory you want to propose of multiple
intelligences
these general cognitive mechanisms you
can't sweep them under the rug
right so if you laid out a number of
hypothetical general or
multiple intelligence measures and they
measured anything that had to do with
abstraction and you averaged across them
what you'd essentially get as a proxy
for iq if you got anything at all
and what really what really stunned me
was that we couldn't
add anything additional to that even we
added a
huge battery of neuropsychological tests
derived from the neuropsych literature
not from the psychometric literature
it was all clinical tests mostly
developed at the montreal neurological
institute we had a
large battery and computerized them and
added them to the iq
measures that we had if you used iq and
the neuropsych measures separately in an
equation they would both contribute but
if you did a factor analysis and
extracted out one factor
which would essentially be the average
then
that factor was the best predictor so i
could never find out from my own
research whether we had just
expanded the definition of iq slightly
in terms of its predictive validity or
whether the neuropsychologists were on
to something but it was striking to me
that
even these tests derived from a purely
clinical literature
that wasn't influenced by the
psychometric tradition and was actually
opposed to it
still ended up measuring exactly the
same thing i always told my students and
you tell me what you think about this
that it was forbidden in my lab to study
anything without also adding an iq
measure because
at least as a covariate because it
seemed and i also think the same thing
about big five personality for whatever
that's worth is like
we know that iq exists it exists or at
least as much as anything
social scientists have ever discovered
exists so
if you're studying any complex phenomena
the first thing you should do is
get what you already know out of the way
and that made research in my lab much
more difficult because we get results
from some measure
and then that would hypothetically be
publishable but then as soon as we
added the iq measures and the
personality measures it would almost
always kill
like we looked at values as a predictor
for example of academic achievement
and there's well-developed values
literature but
we could kill that instantly with iq and
and personality
and i can't get i don't understand why
the field won't accept that
well i'll give you an analogy it's it's
almost it's i think it's analogous to
the fact that
uh all these uh environmental
determinants of axe papers
uh don't never use genes as a covariate
you know it's like
well things change once once you start
to include genes as a covariate
then you find some of these effects drop
away and it
it's interesting it's like we don't even
want to know the truth
you know it's in in certain certain
circumstances
you know i've thought about that too
it's not surprising that people don't
want to know the truth about iq
because it's it's quite nasty i mean
there are huge
differences between people in their
intrinsic ability to learn
and that has me walloping economic and
social consequences and so
there's there's a bitterness in that
that's i mean i think we still have to
address it and take it seriously but
you know so for me it's like iq does the
liberal and the conservative political
uh perspectives incredible damage
because the conservatives are likely to
say
well there's a job for everyone if they
just get up and and you know
get at it and the liberals like to say
well
everybody can be trained to do
everything and both of those are wrong
because there's a there's a large number
of people who
are not who have enough trouble with
abstraction
that finding a productive job in a
complex society has become
extraordinarily difficult and that's a
huge problem
and and we have no idea what to do with
it we won't even look at it
well um something i would like to bring
in this discussion if that's okay is
some of the limits of iq tests
especially with neurodiverse people
because i found in some my own research
i studied something called twice
exceptionality actually i edited a book
called twice exceptionality
um supporting bright and uh creative
students with learning disabilities
sometimes they're intelligent they're
like they're they're very intelligent
but sometimes because of their executive
function
dysfunctions like with adhd individuals
it doesn't show up in an iq test
so i do want to still leave that window
open for us to
what's absolutely fair enough look
there's as and as we already pointed out
iq is only covering 25 of the relative
relevant territory
and the tests are by no means perfect
and there are people
who are measured whose capacity is
measured improperly
with an iq estimate no doubt about that
so and and
and other factors play an important role
like conscientiousness but it's only
about
at least as far as we can measure it and
we can only really measure it still with
self-report or other report personality
tests it adds about
it's only about a third as powerful if
that as iq
this is how i put it i say look it's
really hard just get a
extremely high iq score by accident but
there's many reasons why perhaps someone
bombed an iq test that could have to do
with uh
error variants and other factors but
it's very hard like if you get 160 iq
generally and honestly if you didn't
cheat it's hard to like just
accidentally stumble into
those right answers absolutely yeah
that's a good way of looking at it that
yeah that
that it's the low scores that contain
the errors yeah and fair enough and that
should be attended to
not least because we don't ever want to
deny anybody with potential the
possibility of
developing that and sharing it with
everyone else but
you know so many universities now are
moving away from
the sats let's say and and and because
they
because of their perceived and actual
shortcomings but
my problem with that is that
whatever they're replaced with is likely
to be way worse
on virtually every imaginable dimension
so
we'll see how that all plays out so okay
go ahead well another reason why the
topic is radioactive of course is
because
every time you talk about uh iq
differences people their
their head immediately goes to group
differences um
and we're i just want to clarify we're
talking about individual differences
that's well that's what we've talked
about so far
do you know what i mean and you can't
automatically extrapolate
you know even when i use the word genes
people are scared of the word genes you
know
like like it that should be the most
uncontroversial thing in the world the
fact that for individual to individual
our genes place some influence we don't
want an environmentally deterministic
world that would be horrible
we don't want to you know what i mean
people don't really think that through
you know um
so i just wanted to clarify we're
talking about this you know individual
individual level we're not talking we're
not extrapolating this
to group differences but we're also
talking about it at a comparative level
it's like
well the iq testing process is imperfect
right well compared to what like
you have to come up with a better
alternative you can't just say this
isn't good enough it's like
compared to what we can't we could
assign people to universities randomly
and like like so uh and you could do
this imagine
that your your first year students
anybody could attend first year classes
and then you used first year grades to
decide who got to continue
you could see that you could make a
coherent social policy based on that
that would give everyone a shot
and then it would allow those who
succeeded in the actual enterprise to
progress now it'd be very expensive in
the first year but
that might be beneficial anyways to
expose everyone to that kind of
education
but you can't do that and continue up to
the higher stratospheres of intellectual
endeavor because
people who pursue that have to be able
to do it
so well so we're stuck with it but we
won't have a serious discussion of it
and it's really
it's really unfortunate i would say
within caveat you know we found
in our own paper that iq was was
entirely uncorrelated with artistic
creative achievement
and i've always been kind of interested
what to do with that because um
it just seems like openness to
experience in some of these other
cognitions like i stayed implicit
learning and i found that was correlated
with artistic
uh achievement and weight and reduced
the lean inhibition
the great work you did with shelly
carson um i i replicated some of that
so i think there's more of the story if
we you know if we look at
what what field are we trying to predict
yeah well the openness dimension is of
extreme interest and and and because
there is something to
the personality trait openness that
seems to be related
as you pointed out to creative
achievement but also to
to not so not even so necessarily so
much artistic achievement but even to
enterprise achievement like
entrepreneurial ability we've found a
step that i never published i
used it privately um we found a pretty
pronounced relationship between openness
to experience and
entrepreneurial ability practical
entrepreneurial ability and
as as you well know uh that seems to
have that openness seems to have
something to do with perceptual
differences
um so open people are
they have they seem to have a broader
perceptual range something like that and
they're more emotionally impacted by
their perceptions too they're more
likely to experience
awe they're more likely to be compelled
and gripped by ideas they're more likely
to be curious they're more likely to
engage in
associative thinking so one concept will
remind them of a range of
distantly related concepts more than
someone who's a more constrained thinker
they're more likely to have insight
experiences and and there is something
to that that's not
purely reducible to iq because you can
be you can have a high iq and be
non-creative
it's absolutely likely but not only that
but like and
this this starting to get into the
transcend stuff when you said the word
all awe
then then it starts to get into my newer
research because you know i can look i
can
i could pop up a data set right now and
show you that iq is currently zero with
the extent to which you're going to
experience all in your daily life
but openness to experience is very
strongly correlated with that
right and so what do you make of that
what what do you think what do you think
about
when we open we've had professional
exchanges
on this topic but i haven't talked to
you for years so where's your thinking
gone with re
in relationship to openness to
experience
and you know it can be transformed by
psilocybin mushroom experiences right
griffiths showed that one standard
deviation increase in
openness one year later after one
mystical experience
stunning some profound neurological
transformation
and catherine mclean as well has has
showed that uh
very large effects i'm very very
interested in the linkage between
openness to experience
and self-transcendent experiences
it does seem like certain personality uh
structures are more likely to
experience absorption so i think the
major link there and probably our bridge
here is is the
is the the under discussed topic uh uh
in in the public of
because people talk about flow but
telogen's absorption construct is not
the same thing as
as mihai chick sent me his flow
construct
and i think that when we talk about
opens to experience i think it is quite
linked to these altered states of
consciousness and susceptibility
um to even hypnotisability you know um
this kind of
willingness to um take a
take to dip your toe into the sea of
madness
i would say do you suppose so so
do you suppose that the capacity to
embody
multiple personalities in some sense is
the key aspect to
to openness you know because we're
incredible mimics
and i want to talk to you about the
relationship between mimicry and awe
because i think
aw is the manifestation of the instinct
to mimic
but i've watched creative people play
music for example i remember one
guitarist i was watching
and he was jamming and he was very
expert at it and it was
unbelievably interesting to watch and
listen to him at the same time because
you could see
one second he'd be like a black female
gospel singer from the 1930s and the
next second he'd be like
uh morrison from the doors and you could
see all these musical influences that
that had inhabited him and he was
playing with them constantly and
it was like watching a shape shifter and
and
you know our capacity for abstract into
abstraction means that we can think up
abstractions which are representations
of ourselves in some sense
and then assess their perceptions and
their actions before we implement them
and i i wonder if open people are
are able to be more people
in some sense because i've also known i
think so
you think you think i think there's
something i think there's i actually
tested this
hypothesis um in the sense i looked to
see whether or not
people who were scored higher in opens
to experience were more likely
to have unreliability in their big five
character structure over time
oh that's yeah and i found it they did
you did they did you found that
okay so that means from moment to moment
their personality
and over what span of time well over
from month to month i did i didn't do
like stamp like experience sampling
which would be that'd be really cool
but just over a period of couple months
okay so just to clarify that
personality like iq personality is quite
stable across
time what you see across time is that
people maintain their personality
structures but they become more
agreeable
less neurotic so less characterized by
negative emotion
and more conscientious as they age so
those all seem like good things
hypothetically but your point is that if
you take people are high in openness to
experience which is this creativity
dimension
their personalities are less stable
across time i also wonder if that
accounts to some degree for the oft
remarked upon
hypothetical association between
creativity and instability
because imagine you're high in openness
and you're high in neuroticism
i mean that's a problem because you have
that personality variability that's an
intrinsic part of you but
in some ways that's going to be harder
on you because that variability is going
to make things more unpredictable
i've had i've seen absolutely open
people have a hard time catalyzing a
single identity
and so that can be hard on them
this is i i couldn't agree more with
what you're saying and and i think that
there's some really cool uh things when
you actually look at the interaction
effects you know like that's what's
really cool
you know um especially what i what i
guess i would call paradoxical traits
you know like uh
you know because you look at the general
correlational structure but then
what what if a person you know really
bucks those general correlational
structure trends what's the word for
that i've been trying to come up with
like a term for that you know
like you know most people who are
conscientiousness
or conscientious i guess uh tend to be
what less what
uh in the general population well
probably less neurotic but what if
you're high neurotic and your high
conscientiousness that's just one
example right
but there are lots of these other kinds
of paradoxical traits that i think are
worth studying in more depth so those
would be singular people in some sense
so right right so high orderly high
openness would be an example of that too
what is that yeah right for instance me
me i i
was hitler oh oh no i was very orderly
and very old
i wasn't going to say i'm i'm not those
traits but but here's something i am
that's paradoxical
and maybe you are too i don't know i'd
like to hear that i score very
high in um autistic-like trait scales
but they also score very high in
schizotypi-like scales
so that's something that in the general
population those are very strongly
negatively correlated with each other
but how in the world am i high in both
those things i think you might be high
in both those things too
do you think that's mediated by openness
maybe that's what it all comes down to
is that that'd be my guess
so so i wonder like i used to see my kid
come home my son
when when he was young he'd come home
after playing with kids and he would be
inhabited by one of the kids
personalities and
often it was a bratty child and so he'd
come home with this whole bag of tricks
and it wasn't just one thing that he
would experiment with it was like
he'd picked up the whole pattern of
behavior from that play
experience and then he'd come home and
try out his new tricks and i wonder
has anybody ever assessed to see if
open people are better or faster mimics
because absorption imagine imagine two
things okay
so imagine first of all that you have
this capacity for awe
and so what that does you meet someone
who's very impressive
and so there's an experience of awe that
goes along with that
now you should mimic someone who's
impressive because
if your judgment of their impressiveness
is accurate then you could be more
impressive if you were more like them so
imagine that there's a an instinct
towards awe
inspired imitation okay now if you were
also very high in absorption you would
get into that and
i think that's probably what's happening
to open people in movies because they
sink really deeply into the movies
they're entranced by them or the
fictional universe
and so they can become possessed by
alternative personalities
and then and that and of course that's
what we want in actors
obviously right we want people who are
possessed by alternative personalities
to act them out for us
and there's no reason because you see
one of the things psychologists don't
study enough
as far as i'm concerned is imitation
it's so fundamental well here's a here's
a maybe a far out link
do you think people who are higher in
openness are more likely to be
ideologically possessed you ever made
that linkage i mean i don't know if
there is something interesting there but
there might be
um to the extent to which uh people who
are higher in openness
tend to be more likely to um have
contagion of other people's emotions and
ideas and maybe have i mean
could that be well i guess i'd think two
things about that
the the the if you're open you're more
easily possessed
line of reasoning would suggest that but
the if you're open
you're likely to blow through arbitrary
cognitive barriers would act
negatively towards that so maybe maybe
what you might see is that
who the hell knows that high openness
teenagers are likely to be ideologically
possessed but
to to not be later
right so maybe yeah yeah yeah because
the mechanism would lead them to that
in the in the early development but it
would lead them out of that as they
matured
and moderator and maybe iq is a
moderator of all of this maybe that's
going full circle yeah well that's a
tough one too because you you know
it it i i suspect that i would suspect
again that
in adolescence higher iq would
would be a predictor of more ideological
possession
because because well imagine that you
you have to be relatively smart
to be interested in political issues or
political abstractions so there's it's a
precondition
and then when you first start being
interested well you're not going to be
very sophisticated
so an ideology is likely what you're
going to adopt
well maybe it's the intellect facet you
know because openness to experience
your pi you pioneered this work which i
carried forward in my graduate work
there's an important distinction uh of
at the aspect level between intellectual
curiosity and
um openness to experience more having to
do with the actual experiential aspect
of it
and so maybe the intellectual curiosity
part is a modifier there even more so
than iq
right who knows right well i i i mean
all we've found so far in our
investigations of
openness and political view is that it's
a
definitely and it isn't only our lab
obviously and we didn't originate this
idea for that matter
um openness is definitely a predictor of
liberal and left-leaning political
proclivity
that's that's clear and and that goes
along with
a comparative interest in fiction say
versus non-fiction and
it's definitely temperamental and i've
been thinking tell me what you think
about this so
you know that openness and
conscientiousness are the best two
predictors of political belief
okay so then you might ask and this goes
along with your interest in interaction
says
why the hell is it openness and
conscientiousness
relatively uncorrelated traits you know
why isn't it openness and neuroticism or
or or or or extroversion and
agreeableness why those two why
political
and so i've been thinking i think it has
to do with borders
and i've been influenced in my thinking
by all the new literature on the
relationship
between contagious disease and political
belief so
there's a huge literature this is the
only literature i've ever seen that has
effect sizes approximating those of iq
so if you measure the prevalence of
infectious disease
at the city state provincial or country
level
you find that there's a walloping
correlation with authoritarian attitudes
like 0.7 it's ridiculous it's massive
and there's some association there with
disgust sensitivity although that hasn't
been completely
pulled out yet so so imagine this is
imagine that
the open types so the liberal types they
want the free flow of information
so they don't like barriers they don't
like borders between anything they don't
like borders between concepts they don't
like borders between genders they don't
like
borders because it interferes with the
free flow of information
but the cost of the free flow borderless
free flow
is contamination and so and they're both
right
you open the borders well look what
happened last year international where
it's an
international society so we have an
international pandemic
so you open up the doors to information
flow
you also open up the doors to
contamination and i would say that's
true
biologically and ideationally as well
so the the analogy holds so that's why
those two things combine to determine
political belief because
political belief is about borders
fundamentally the one thing i don't
understand about that is that
neuroticism is pretty strongly
correlated with
disgust sensitivity or even the kind of
thing you're referring to
so why is why is neuroticism not what
you know because you said openness
we kind of thought we kind of thought
and and some of my theoretical work
led me to presume that more conservative
types or more ideologically possessed
types it wasn't clear which
would be more neurotic but they're not
like if anything conservatives are less
neurotic than liberals
at a trait level and it's a complex
literature because there is some
literature showing that conservatives
are more sensitive under some conditions
to some kinds of negative emotion
you know and then you can generate up a
defense theory of conservative ideology
but it doesn't look to me like it's fear
related because it doesn't manifest
itself in neuroticism at all and it
should if that theory was correct
there's something about disgust that's
crucial that that has been understudied
so far but that's changing i think
that's
super interesting and i've also been
interested in the uh at the aspect
level analysis of these things so um the
overall agreeableness to me
is is not a player but once you look at
the aspect level you find
that they diverge politeness is higher
among
conservatives and compassion
is higher among liberals i should just
point out for everyone that's listening
is that work done in my lab by colin de
young
particularly we showed that you could
break the big five down into ten
sub aspects we call them so you get some
additional predictive utility sometimes
if you use the more differentiated
scales and
we did investigate as as dr kaufman just
mentioned we did investigate the effects
of that on political belief and we did
find as you said that
conservatives are more polite and that
liberals are more
um uh empathetic or more agreeable and
and
we don't know what to make of that
partly because we don't really
understand politeness
exactly it it has something to do with
it's something
related to deference to authority
politeness
um but it like one of them isn't just
respect
respect for authority it seems a little
bit different than deference
it could could be respect sure sure and
but
but then you it's complicated because
conscientiousness
is also associated i would say to some
degree with respect for authority right
and so
what's the difference what is politeness
adding that conscientiousness doesn't
already cover
so certainly yeah yeah yeah well it it
it well i was really excited by the
political research uh partly that was
done in my lab but al
also elsewhere because it's really it's
quite revolutionary i think to think
through the implications of the fact
that your political viewpoints are
determined by your by your temperament
and because what it means is that
your biology in large part has provided
you with a
filter for the facts right so we like to
think well you derive your rational
conclusions
from the set of facts that you're
exposed to but unfortunately
you have to choose the facts because
there's just too many of them and so
temperament is playing a major role in
determining what you expose yourself to
we found that with fiction preference
for example it's like
open people are much more likely to read
fiction and fiction of certain swords
and so the differences start with the
information gathering process
itself is that what they work with mar
yeah was that
yeah i love that i love that work so
much by the way we had a hell of a time
getting that stuff published
although it's it's crazy when you
publish what's going to be published and
what's going to have an impact you
certainly can't predict it but yes that
that all worked out quite well
so okay so back to let's go back to the
if you don't mind unless you want to
take this somewhere else let's go back
to the humanism
issue okay which is central to your new
book so you got it still got interested
in
what what was it about the humanist
define it and then tell me what it was
that captured your attention
so it was in particular it was
humanistic psychology and i actually
distinguished that from the humanism
movement that maybe you you know like
that that's more a philosophical
movement you know um the humanistic
psychology movement
was in the 50s and 60s um a cadet of
psychologists who were unconvinced that
we were telling the full story about uh
humanity in humans through the freud
approach or the behaviorism approach
they felt like we were neglecting higher
principles
they felt like we were neglecting um the
investigation of the whole person
as a system right freud
focused a lot as an md on
psychopathology on mental illness
exactly and the behaviorists took
everything that was related to
consciousness
and and subjective experience completely
off the table
and and we should point out that that
had utility both those movements had
tremendous utility but there was this
lacunae let's say that the
existentialists addressed in the 50s
the existential side yeah just and then
the humanists in the 60s
by the way i loved your lecture uh about
carl rogers and
and the phenomenology approach so that
was that was really cool i liked that
um yeah so in a big way you know
there was still a respect for those
prior approaches they weren't saying
they were they were complete
you know like abraham maslow st did
really
rigorous great work in grad school and
rats you know you
you're looking at reaction time tasks
but he got bored with it and he felt
that there was more to the story of
humanity
so i guess what really captured my
interest is this notion of studying the
whole system
the whole person and how all the parts
work together
i think that we both agree in our
philosophy that
nothing is actually objective or
absolutely good or bad
no no no psychological trait it's it
depends how it's integrated
into the system you know this is why i
don't i i'm critical of the distinction
between positive and negative emotions
like we can absolutely classify which
emotions are positive and
absolutely classify which ones are
negative as opposed to just where you
have comfortable emotions you have
uncomfortable emotions i mean
you can have the experience but then we
put the label on top of the experience
um you've you've said you've had some
good lectures about the potential
benefits of
integrating your anger or um are
integrating i mean anything you
integrate
in a healthy way into the whole system
um can be beneficial
you know well that has a crucial issue
there right yeah that's the crucial
issue that the existentialists and the
human humanist and jung as well
as far as i'm concerned concentrated on
which is
well when you're talking about
integration
let's say and and so the psychoanalyst
a psychoanalytic approach even freudian
approach would be to uncover something
repressed and to bring it into the whole
personality well what exactly do you
mean by the whole
personality and what do you mean by
integrated and so the humanists
for me the humanists were the entry
point to the answer to that question
absolutely so so okay so so you you're
you're updating maslow with your with
this new book and and
so walk us in one way
i'm updating maslow but in another way
i'm actually setting the record straight
about maslow because there's so many
misconceptions
and things he never even said so first
of all he never drew a pyramid
there there was in none of his papers
did he ever
draw a pyramid to represent his
hierarchy of needs
um he didn't even really think of it in
that way in fact i was talking to
someone who knew him personally and
there's a story where he was having
lunch with him and he saw on the dollar
bill or
i think it's the dollar bill where
there's a pyramid and he looked at me he
said
i hate that pyramid so
look he didn't he didn't like that's not
how he thought about he actually says in
his writings he said
i would like to present my integrated
hierarchy
of uh human needs and he he was very
clear to call it inter integrated
um he he said it's it's every single
need rests
very carefully upon the lower need but
just because life is not like a video
game where you reach one level of needs
and then
like some voice from evolve is like
congrats you've unlocked the next level
and then you never go back to the prior
level
um integration fundamentally means that
every
single higher need depends
on the lower need that came before it
depends on it in a very important way
that gets missed by the way it's often
represented in um
modern even psychology textbooks like we
i really think we need to update the
psychology textbooks about this
yeah well lots of great thinkers are
poorly represented
by their low order their low resolution
representation
i mean piaget jean piaget the
developmental psychologist who's
basically
taught as a stage theorist which was a
tiny fraction of what he did
and certainly not the most important
thing he was fundamentally interested in
reconciling the distinction between
religion and science and i never heard
hide nor hair of that till i
started reading piaget while the
translations i couldn't read it in the
french original
so you know the ideas of creative
geniuses are filtered through
the through lesser minds when they're
taught and and
much of what's complex and interesting
disappears and what's simplified is what
remains
c'est la vie um so do you want to walk
us through a bit
the theory and then what you've done
with it and what what it's done for you
and what you think it can do for other
people absolutely
and then um i'll also bring in how some
of your own work influenced it
so okay so the hierarchy of needs um as
as mazzo originally proposes that we
have a hierarchy of pre-potency and
that's the word he used pre-potency
um various motivations that given
certain
um deprivations um cause our entire
consciousness to be
um very narrowed down to those def to to
paying attention to those things so if
we could if we severely lack food
our consciousness sees everything as as
a potential source of food
if we severely are deficient with our
with our connections and belonging he
says
we have we show a very kind of needing
love so everyone looks like
everyone's utility value is is to
satisfy this hole in ourselves of
of connection of our loneliness same
with self-esteem needs
if we're severely deprived of any
opportunities for mastery or
esteem from others we become very needy
and demand respect
but he argued that the deprivation realm
of human existence can be distinguished
from the
being realm of human existence he said
once we can
it's like putting on a clear clear set
of glasses for the first time
when you've when you've only been seeing
very very
unclear glasses and when you put on the
clear glasses and you enter the being
realm or the growth realm
of human existence you no longer
demand for the world to conform to your
deprivations
you start to see the world on its own
terms you start to see the world
and you and even dare i say admire and
this is where transcendence starts to
come into play
admire and love people for who they are
independently of you
independently of of their utility value
for your own deprivations
so to me i thought that was the most
important distinction in maslow's theory
that had been lost
okay so let me ask you a question there
so
there's two distinctions that are being
made
and they seem to be conflated to some
degree in maslow but maybe that's a
misunderstanding on my part
there's an implication at least that the
the higher
uh the more transcendent values
or perceptions make themselves manifest
once the deprivation states have been
taken care of
that's sort of the but then but there's
a conceptual distinction
that's equally important which is that
there are deprivation motivated
uh perceptions motivations and actions
but there's another class as well and
those should be separated and
i have more trouble with the first
presumption than the second
because well when when i was think
thinking
through maslow for example in in the
courses i've taught
on existentialism and humanism
um solzhenitsyn talk who's a great
existential
psychologist as far as i'm concerned
talked about people who were in
the prison camps in russia who were
starving and
deprived in multiple different ways and
frankel did the same thing with regards
to the concentration camps in
nazi germany and he describes in painful
story after story
people turning to what maslow would
consider
being needs in the midst of severe
deprivation and finding
sustenance and profound sustenance there
so
he talked for example about a group of
intellectuals who were starving to death
in a work camp who had a weekly seminar
where they discussed their
specific academic specializations
and you know it shrunk over time as each
of them died of malnutrition
but and and solzhenitsyn
produces a very powerful critique of the
idea that
the being realm let's say in maslow's
terms
can only be accessed once the
deprivation realm has been
taken care of and well
well that i found nothing interesting
to say the least and it's it's very
interesting but i would modify and say
um at least you know this this is where
maybe what maslow said and what
scott barry kaufman is saying might
start to diverge
because um what i try to argue in this
book
is that it's all about the um how how
those deprivations are integrated not
the fact that they're gone
um so for instance in my chapter on
purpose i cover what i call the hitler
problem
and that's the the you know the very i
think a reasonable question did hitler
have a higher purpose you know and
you know and what would that even mean
in the in the whole hierarchy of needs
model considering
that i put purpose as a higher need in
the growth realm
you know or am i saying that hitler
entered the being a growth realm
and the way i resolved that is that i
argued that
you know some of the most pro-social or
or most positive aspects of
manifestations of the higher need of
purpose occur when one's sufferings
are integrated into one's higher order
structure
but it's it's not the only thing that's
driving their whole system
so i just really do like viewing this
from a whole system perspective
because once you can integrate kind of
this
the suffering you had and this the anger
you have for the suffering but you
integrate that with this need for
exploration as i talk about as a growth
need
as well as um bee love which is uh
maslow called it beloved love for the
just like humanitarian sort of concern
or as um alfred adore called it uh
freud i can never pronounce the word but
you know social interest
if once we have a higher level
integration of all these things i think
you get something
much better as the sum of the parts than
any of the parts themselves
does that make sense yes well and well
let's we can we
we can also walk walk through this
argument in some more detail i mean
it it's obviously the case that
deprivation can reach a point where
nothing but the deprivation is salient i
mean if you're in enough pain for
example if you're hungry enough
etc etc so there's limit conditions that
that make up these deprivation states
that
skew everything um if you're dying of
thirst for example you're not going to
in all likelihood engage in a
philosophical conversation right so at
some point
deprivation takes the reins completely
but then there's
that one of the dangers in in maslow's
approach as far as i was concerned
and this is partly why the writings of
theodor del rimpo have been so
interesting to me because
dale rimple talks he worked a lot in
really in the what would you say the dis
he worked a lot along among the
dispossessed
class in inner city uh brit
british cities in the in the innermost
confines of
of british cities and he described a
culture of
of poverty that characterized the the
dispossessed
and they weren't poor so much
if you thought about poverty in terms of
absolute deprivation
so he had worked in africa as well among
people who were by
any reasonable standard much more
materially deprived than
the members of the population he was
addressing in psychiatric practice
but he his fundamental diagnosis was
that
the multi-generational poverty cycle
violence alcoholism drug abuse
antisocial behavior that he saw
was a consequence of a profound
philosophical
disequilibrium that was the primary
agent that was driving all this rather
than
something that could be addressed for
example by attending
by social attention being paid say to
um you know like a guaranteed basic
income or something like that and so
there are i mean getting this straight
is really
of crucial importance and it is really
complicated so and maslow always felt to
me
look i learned a lot from the humanists
and i would say
they were an entry point to me into the
domain of
practical philosophical slash religious
thinking
the humanists offered within the field
of psychology
spirituality for people for atheists
that's what it looked like to me
and and i'm not denigrating that i say
that with all due respect
and they tr they did introduce
spirituality
let's say back into this into the
scientific community among psychologists
so that was extremely attractive to me
and
well let me tell you how i tested my
model empirically because i published a
paper um
where i attempted to integrate um this
theory into modern day personality
psychology and this is where you
you come in quite frankly and your own
ideas and work
so i had a hypothesis which colin
thought was a good hypothesis and that i
should run with it
that um the deprivation and and uh grow
and being realm that maslow talked about
would map on to stability and plasticity
in the big five that that these two
higher order factors of the big
and and i and i found that to be the
case i actually developed and validated
a psychometric scale of
all the self-actualization
characteristics that maslow wrote about
and i i found that i could validate 10
out of the 17 that he mentioned
and that the 10 were just um really
strongly positively correlated with uh
with plasticity and so let's take that
apart for a sec for everyone so
work done in my lab again by colin de
young and
other people had looked at two factor
solutions too but
um we showed that agreeableness
neuroticism and conscientiousness
neuroticism reversed
and conscientiousness together
seemed to make a super factor so they
were somewhat correlated
and so did extraversion and openness and
colin in particular has gone off and
developed
all of that into a theory with
neuroscientific underpinnings and
he started doing that in at the
university of toronto was considered
continued for the last it's got to be
near 20 years and so
we found stability we called the super
factor stability and plasticity
for a variety of reasons but and so you
just said that you mapped stability onto
the deprivation realm and and yeah and
and plasticity into the being realm
and i think that um that's how that's my
modern day flavor on this
like integrating with personality
psychology because at the at the end of
the day i'm really an individual
difference
and that's my focus is individual
differences cognitive science and
personality
and i think that the um optimal and what
i argued in this paper is that the
optimal
cybernetic system is one that has a deep
integration of both stability and
plasticity
right so really it really isn't an
either or question it's a matter of
do you have the skills that allow you to
resist
distractions against your higher order
goals and you have the flexibility
to change course when it's no longer
serving those higher order goals
and and that that's how i try to
integrate maslow's theory with modern
day
cybernetic and personality theory so
i've been
you tell me what you think about this
i've been working on the presupposition
that
that balance is it manifests itself
as something that's analogous to chicks
and mahali's flow
although i think it's more like it's
it's act if
it's active engagement and immerse
immersement you experience that when
well when you're having a good
conversation let's say and you're not
attending to anything but
the ideas that are being bandied back
and forth you're not aware of the
broader context you're not aware of the
flow of time
you're focused and engaged and
interested in what's happening
and that happens as far as i'm concerned
when
maximal when optimal information flow
has been established
so you you want to maintain the
integrity of your
current uh perceptual frameworks
essentially your current interpretive
frameworks
you don't want them to fall apart but
because they're limited because you're
limited
they have to continually transform at
some rate and expand
so as you be become more competent and
as the world changes around you
so it seems to me that the instinct of
meaning is the manifestation of an
internal signal
that you've optimized information flow
for your particular nervous system so
you're not
getting more information than you can
stand so it's not knocking you into
uncertainty related anxiety
but you are incorporating information at
a rate that's optimal with regards to
your continued adaptation and growth
well i love that i absolutely love that
yeah i think that manifests itself
as the sense of meaning and i think
that's what music produces it's and
now when you ex when you listen to music
and you're deeply engaged
you get an analog of that
and and and it's like a model it's like
this is what your life could be like
this musical
beauty if you were in the right place at
the right time
all the time which is what you should
should should could strive to attain
and there's something that there's
something that never runs out about that
idea
i would love that and just add um is it
worth distinguishing between the kind of
meaning that is pre-wired you know
programmed through the course of human
evolution that are universal
uh forms of meaning that all of us would
agree
give us meaning versus individualistic
uh forms of meaning that maybe touch
more of our unique traits
and well i would say that's probably a
matter of level of integration which is
that
the more universal the trait the the
meaning experience is the more it's
related to an emergent integration
so so you know as you as you already
pointed out we all differ in our
temperaments
and quite substantively and so there are
going to be things that we find
particularly interesting that other
people
won't find interesting that might
determine something like the choice of
our careers it's not trivial these
differences there
but but as you integrate
it makes sense that as you integrate the
thing that's integrated becomes more
similar across diverse
places i mean how could it be otherwise
and that's where i think you get into
the realm of universal human values
and i think they are their emergent
properties of reciprocal game
something like that so let me let me
tell you something interesting you tell
me what you think about this
so you know i've been very uh what would
you say
opposed to the idea that
the typical hierarchical social
structure
is based on power you know there's an
imp there's a political argument going
on
everywhere now and at the extremes the
claim is something like
well hierarchical the hierarchical
structures that characterize the west
that characterize capitalism
or maybe that just characterize the west
in general
are based on power
okay so first i talked to the
richard trombley this week who's one of
the world's leading authority on the
development of aggression in human
beings okay so what he showed quite
clearly is that
aggression is there right at the
beginning so it's one of these built-in
motivational systems that you already
talked about
the most aggressive age
is two if you group two year olds
together
the the probability of kicking hitting
biting and stealing is higher than it is
if you group
any other age together and that declines
precipitously with socialization
okay so the general trend is from
aggression to to less aggression
and then you can differentiate the
aggressive kids
into three groups the kid the
two-year-olds into three groups
those who are never aggressive even at
two thirty percent of the human
population
those who are aggressive sporadically
fifty percent
and seventeen percent who are
chronically aggressive
it's from that category if those kids
aren't socialized into peace
over the course of their developmental
history most particularly by the age of
four
they're the long-term permanent
offenders
okay so but what's interesting about
this and crucial i believe
is that the developmental trend across
aggression categories is for less
aggression
aggression isn't uh and therefore power
is not
a stable strategy for negotiating
success
in human hierarchies and it's more like
it's more something like reciprocity
it's and we need to recognize that
because it really is the case that
you're much more likely to be successful
if you're productive and reciprocal
and i think that's an emergent that
emerges out of hierarchical
organization and i think it's the same
across cultures you know with variation
but that's a universal
human truth and i think we're adapted to
it
and we recognize that in others when we
see it and that produces awe
when we really see it that person is
hyper productive they're hyper generous
i want to be like that person
so competent and relational will those
be synonyms for those two words
yeah but yes absolutely it's it's
competent and generous
what a combination and you know the
thing about generosity is that it allows
competent people to store the fruits of
their labor
right i mean if if you and i collaborate
and i'm generous in our collaboration
then
you're going to collaborate with me
again maybe sometime down the road when
i really need it
and vice versa you know when i was
struck i talked to
jocko willing two weeks ago and jocko's
this like hyper masculine warrior type
of character you know he's
navy seal and very intimidating
physically and psychologically and
he told me in the naval seal training
for example the
the primary dictum is you have your
buddies back
it isn't biggest meanest ape wins and
that doesn't even work for chimpanzees
as friends to wall has shown
so there is an ethic man and one of the
things i liked about the humanists and
about your book is that you know you're
pointing out that there is this
integrative tendency that
that is associated with values and that
there's something universal about it
it's like yeah yeah yeah
definitely absolutely and if i may go
into a territory that may seem
seem completely unrelated but i don't
think it is i wrote a book
called mating intelligence unleashed
that co-authored with an evolutionary
psychologist glenn gear
but we found that the the male the male
that was most attractive to women was
the tender defender
and i feel like you're kind of
describing a tender defender i really
want to talk to you about that so okay
so
i've um
i've been involved in an email exchange
with richard dawkins
and i asked him to come on my podcast
and he wrote back very politely and in a
detailed letter
pointing out why i wanted to talk to him
which was very surprising to me i do
said i wanted to talk to him about sex
selection particularly
and then he identified a paragraph from
a talk i did
with sam harris that nailed exactly why
i wanted to talk
with dawkins okay so dawkins is the
blind watchmaker guy right
and and he's anti-teleological to the
core and
also also anti-religious etc and
the people know about dawkins and
dawkins is an admirable person
intellectually
but this their the evolutionary
psychology biologists are not taking the
issue of sexual selection seriously
enough in relationship to value
so let's take what you just said
all right so imagine this you tell me if
you think this is wrong because i really
want to know if it's wrong
men women do this too but where you're
going to sex differentiate for for the
time being
men organize hierarchies around tasks
they want to get something done okay and
it's something that everyone in the
group wants to get done
and so as soon as they aggregate
themselves towards the task
a hierarchy of competence emerges
because there's individual differences
and if the group's functional they let
the guys who are better at the task
rise to the top okay now imagine
that across tasks there's a proclivity
for some men to rise and others not to
and those would be men who are competent
and generous
across tasks and so they're more likely
to emerge as successful
in the domain of of task-related
hierarchies
all right now we know that women are
what's the word they made across and up
hierarchies
it's one of them relational
yes they're they're men made across and
down hierarchies
women mate across and up and that's
obvious
cross-culturally it's ameliorated to
some degree in countries like the
scandinavian countries but it's there
cross-culturally they like men who are a
bit older and they like men who are a
bit above them
in the hierarchical game let's say
okay men vote on who the most
valid man is and women peel from the top
and that value game drives evolution
it's not random it's not random at all
and so that's you said tender defender
and i do think that's generous
productivity
and so not only were selected for that
and sexual selection
specifies that even more completely and
intensely
intensely so men men can gain that by
by displaying trappings of wealth and
like the pickup artist types
they mimic tender defender and they can
fool women that way but women
you know by and large are looking for
cues for for exactly that
competence and the capacity to protect
the ability to protect why out what else
would you want for your children
you know you yeah i mean what you're
saying links so much to the javi's
handicap
principle in evolutionary psychology you
know that you need honest
reliable signals um uh
do uh like women are pretty smart at
seeing uh you know
like yeah well they're they're the
survival of their children depends on it
that's why they're extremely smart at it
as they should be and
like i don't i don't believe that it's a
misreading of the evolutionary
literature
to point out that one of the reasons
that we have diverged
so rapidly from our con from our common
ancestor with chimps
the chimps seem much more similar to
that common ancestor than we are
is because chimp females are
non-selective maters
whereas human females are highly
selective maters
and you know this manifests itself in if
you look at these charts they're quite
comical in
in some sense if you look at how men
rate women
on a typical dating site it's pretty
much a normal distribution the average
woman gets an average rating and
you know the 9 out of ten gets a nine
and and and so forth it's
distributed as you would expect but it's
skewed way to the left for men
like 60 of men are like a four or lower
and so even in in just
uh ratings of attractiveness there's
exactly
sex differences so so you put it what
you put it very well though when you
said it
our survival or species literally
depends on it i love it i just want to
double click on that okay so then the
question is and this ties into this
humanist idea
what is it that we're aiming at well
um what part of that is well what are
the elements that make up
competence and generosity well we know
what competence is made out of
iq and conscientiousness that's a huge
chunk of it so in
general problem solving capability
that's iq
consciousness is diligent application of
that
okay so then you pair that with
generosity
and openness to experience yes well
there'd be there'd be a niche there
because that's where you get creative
types and they can be radically
i think of creativity as a high risk
high return game you're highly likely to
fail but i'm just linking that to uh
jeffrey miller's
uh the hypothesis about creativity being
a a reliable indicator
of genetic mutation load which is why it
would be so sexy
you know from from the selector point of
view oh you'd have to elaborate out that
a bit because this
this was also the case for like all
sorts of other species right
bower birds for example exactly and even
fish for god's sake there's have you
ever seen those sculptures that puffer
fish make at the bottom of the ocean
it's incredible
it's very specific and they're beautiful
and they're complicated
and they take a lot of work it's like
birds select highly for creativity in
many cases and so you see this
you see this emerge out of that
evolutionary process in species that are
quite distant from ours
it's it it it points to something
underneath that's common
you know even that's common across
creative fish and creative people
it's quite the damn gap well this this
goes back to like a lot of things we're
saying because like human
human intelligence human creativity is
so complex it's very hard to fake it it
goes back to like what i said earlier
you can't just accidentally get like a
170 iq even though there's lots of
reasons why
maybe it missed lower iq is mis
representing your iq but
you know this does relate to the fact
that you know reliable indicators
of these things are important from a
sexual selection point of view as well
as other points
well that's crucial you know because the
blind watchmaker types they say well
evolution is just a random process and
there's unfortunate political imp and
philosophical implications that
instantly emerge from that
everything's bloody pointless there's no
direction there's no such thing as real
value it's like wait a sec wait a sec
there's random mutation on the
creativity production
side so that life capitalizes on chance
as an
extra domain of creative production just
and you see that in creative thought in
people too because there's a kind of a
randomness
about creative thinking you open up the
gates and let
ideas mate you know promiscuously let's
say
and so there but there's no reason to
assume whatsoever that the selection
mechanism is random especially when you
add in sexual selection
and as soon as you introduce
consciousness
i think you introduce sexual selection
and
as soon as you introduce sexual
selection you introduce directionality
and so much for randomness
you can't derive
so the the people that the processes
that make the watch might be random
although you know what's happening down
at the genetic level is pretty damn
complex and even bacteria exchange dna
with each other so there's a plenty of
play down at the genetic level as well
as room for mutation
but once you get up to the selection
level like to me
conscious choice is the fundamental
determinant of evolutionary progress
and i can't and look even darwin
because darwin was a genius he stressed
sexual selection much as
natural selection but biologists for a
hundred years never paid any attention
to that
and no wonder like it's revolutionary to
be fair i do think jeffrey miller to be
fair jeffrey moore i think he did a good
job in his book the meeting mind
kind of um bringing to uh consciousness
of
the fact that um creativity of may have
evolved
due to sexual selection processes you
know itself
and as well as human consciousness
itself may have evolved due to sexuality
look i mean look plenty of biologists
have been
assessing sexual selection in the last
30 years but it was
it was under stress to a huge degree for
a long long time
and it is a game changer because
sexual selection among human beings i
think is more important determinant of
of successful reproduction than natural
selection i mean they're the same at
some level
women are acting as the gatekeepers and
so they are
natural selection in some sense but
but how can you deny the role of
conscious directionality in that
and and i don't see flaws in my
reasoning i mean it is the case that
men arrange hierarchies around
competence
and generosity fundamentally it's not
power
even bloody chimps don't use power you
know
they baboons they're a bit of a
different story but power is too
unstable
and so and i think it's of advantage to
men to
elect men even though that gives some
men
a wider range of mating opportunities
because
the net benefit of enhanced productivity
especially when coupled with generosity
is so high that the downside you know of
the hierarchical ranking is
trivial in comparison you want the best
warrior leading your rating party
obviously i mean we want the best person
in power whether it's a man or woman
right
i mean we obviously want we want you
know a really competent woman in power
as well
of course we and we and men select
competence in women too but
there's differential selection to some
degree because men will
mate across and down whereas women mate
across and up
so yeah the men aren't putting the same
selection pressure
on those attributes of femininity that
women are putting on men
men put their own attributes on i'm not
saying
that youth for example is a tremendous
determinant
i think you're saying a lot of really uh
stimulating things i'm trying to wonder
is there a section
do you think no i mean you're
stimulating my head in a million
directions but do you think that
that there's a sex difference in that do
you think men are more likely to
abuse positions of power when they're in
power as opposed to women
has that ever been stopped i think
there's actually data showing the
reverse
very interesting i'm curious to see data
on that yeah
unfortunately and i don't have this at
hand there isn't
research going on into machiavellianism
among
status achieving women and some of
that's done at ubc and
i've i can't give you the details
because i just came across and i'm just
running it
you know i'm just starting to process it
but no i don't think men are more likely
to abuse
power i also think it's also mostly
as a general rule it's really
counterproductive i want to ask you
something too you tell me what you think
about this so
um in terms of deep pleasure that's
associated with
higher order values one of the things
that i've noticed about
extremely competent people in
positions of authority and and
productivity
is the delight that they take in
mentoring
and i don't know what it's like in your
personal experience but my
my experience has been that there isn't
anything that's more rewarding than that
all things considered do you think
that's right well think about what
there's
think about what that means for the
emergence of value
you know as a biological idea is there
something unbelievably pleasurable about
finding someone competent
and of high moral caliber let's say
and opening doors to them and then
watching them progress
you know jordan that gets to the heart
of my whole pro my whole project
of this book of transcendence right well
that's why i'm bringing it up
that's it that's it is i want people to
you know uh i want to be able to spot
the potential in people that they don't
even see in themselves
to me that's special right you know i
agree
i agree i i don't think there's anything
more look i was talking to this
kid who's 27 he interviewed me a couple
of
days ago and he was this he worked in
nightclubs for years he's an attractive
guy a charismatic guy and so
you know from the perspective of
young men who aren't successful in their
life he was doing just fine because
he was charismatic and attractive and he
had a whole nightclub life thing going
and so
he'd kind of mastered that but he
started a podcast and started to pay
very careful attention to what he was
saying and it's a human development
podcast
and now he's getting letters from people
who are saying man you know you're
really helping me out it's really
making a difference to my life and he
told me that
successful as he was in his sort of man
about town
persona and everything that that granted
him it was nothing at all compared to
the intrinsic pleasure that
he experiences when someone
tells him that and i think that's right
i
and and that's you think there's almost
nothing more antithetical to a power
philosophy than that it's like no dom
the pleasure in domination which is
resentful and
bitter and cruel and short-lived and
counterproductive
that's nothing compared to the pleasure
that
you take if you have any sense in
finding someone with
some possibility and opening doors for
them they're not even in the same
universe
i'm going to go further and say not just
pleasure but what greater source of
meaning
in one's life yes could someone have
any meaning the pleasure is secondary
but the meaning is so deep
that it pleasure is an epic phenomenon
yeah
so yes i mean i see that in your book i
know what you're up to
you know i mean you're trying to like
the
humanists in general and i found them
extremely helpful rogers was
reading rogers was very useful to me and
maslow as well it's like
there's something within you that needs
to be developed that's of great benefit
to you and to everyone else
simultaneously
i liked jung in the final analysis
i thought i put him at the top of the
panoply of of a psychologist of this
type because he took
the study of transcendence into the
religious domain
and and that seemed to me well i found
much much a much deeper
uh comprehension of of its limits
as a consequence of reading young i
tried to get there
i tried to get there in this book to the
spiritual
level of transcendence but i felt like i
could only get there after
very carefully in an integration way
put all the other pieces in place
because i think there's a lot of pseudo
spirituality that you see these days a
lot of spiritual transcendence where
it's
transcendence built on a faulty
foundation of
of basic needs and actually being driven
by deprivation needs
like the need for esteem for instance
you'll see a lot of these gurus
um who uh really it's there you see that
with ideology too
you know yes it's driven by unrecognized
deprivation i see
a lot of unresolved freudian familial
psychopathology
driving ideologically i mean the idea
for example that
the patriarchy is authoritarian and
fundamentally based on power it's like
well
how was your relationship with your
father just out of curiosity
have you ever had a positive
relationship with any man in your entire
life
whether you're a man or a woman it
doesn't really have ever asked that
question have you ever asked
that question well it's not a good way
to make friends jordan well i generally
don't hit people with questions like
that if i see it
you know because it's it's it's it's
instantaneous surgery if you're accurate
and it's not
so you don't i don't do that but i see
it i don't recommend it i don't
recommend it no
no but it's definitely worth you know
true consideration because you've got to
ask yourself well why would you
reduce your political theorizing to that
particular unidimensional proposition
and but but and for me that well this is
again what partly why i like your book
is
and and this line of work in general is
like
no no you don't understand is that
functional human organizations are
actually predicated on
they work way better for everyone if
they encourage
the manifestation of the highest
possible human values
and my experience in in the both in the
academic world and in the corporate
world is that
companies that abide by those universal
principles
do much much better in every possible
way
and that doesn't mean that you know i
think when when structures deteriorate
they become dominated by people who play
power games
that happens all the time we have to be
awake to that it happens all the time
but that doesn't mean that functional
hierarchies have that
structure and i agree and i'm really
deeply concerned about that that that's
another topic i mean we i feel like
we're trying we're actually in real time
integrating about 40 different threads
but um i think that is uh the power
games
going on in society right now is
something deeply deeply concerns me i
feel like
even um i think i feel like i i've
learned in the past couple years that
i'm too naive
as and as a human and i've been trying
to actually improve that
because i tend to treat everyone i meet
in good faith i mean i don't care who
you are
like like let's talk that can be courage
you know like
because say it's naive to begin with
and then you get walloped and you're no
longer naive but then you get cynical
and bitter and that's actually
improvement
but then you think no no cynicism no
bitterness
i'm gonna open myself up again and take
the goddamn hits
and that's courage i feel like that's
where i'm at right now actually
i feel like that's where i'm at right
now uh it's been a real transformation
for me a real a real
uh yeah it's been a growth journey so
what did you see okay you said naivety
so what have you why did you come to
that conclusion
i didn't know that that sometimes
because i'm a caring person and i'm
empathetic
so um some people i've started noticing
that i would uh say things like i would
say research findings or
things that i just i'm curious just
purely curious about people would say
you know that that hurts like you
shouldn't talk about that stuff or um
uh or do you know that if that some of
this can cause cause damage
to uh to to minority populations etc
and i'm a caring person so that really
kicks me in the gut
because the last thing i want to do is
hurt a minority i mean i don't want to
hurt a minor
anyone but then i started to realize in
some
instances definitely not all obviously
but in some instances there was a power
game being played that was
outside of my level of comprehension or
outside my level of
like of understanding that wasn't
personal
against me but actually there's just
something being played out
where um if you have a certain ideology
there are certain
were terms buzzwords and things that you
just you just
that they're just off limits from even
uh bringing into a discussion
and i may have inadvertently sometimes
like it's like i inadvertently tripwire
things sometimes that are outside of my
level
so many tripwires that you yeah this
that the game that people who are
playing that game is playing
are playing is the laying of
unavoidable tripwires because it's a
dominance game and all i have to do is
put enough tripwires around you and you
will definitely stumble across one of
them
but how's a caring person supposed to
navigate tripwires
like give advice for that how's a caring
compassionate human being
possibly supposed to navigate tripwires
i should say a compassionate person who
also is committed to the truth that's
what i should say
how in the world do we navigate the
tripwires
you try to say things that you believe
are true
and you take the consequences you know
and you do it carefully and you pay
attention
you pay attention but i would say more
importantly look you you have this
podcast and i have a podcast and
we're both educators and in a broad
sense and
and i believe that that's our ethical
responsibility given our training and
our now our reach
it's like well the way i navigate that
landscape is i have conversations like
this
they're better and that's what we've got
when you're when you're trying to
diminish malevolence let's say
an ignorance misunderstanding willful or
otherwise
your best bet is to do something better
and use that as a model
and that works and i'm so hardened by
this i can give you an example so
i've been working with this musician his
name is akira the dawn
and he has taken quotes from my lectures
which i hope are meaningful and positive
and also not naive
i hope and he's been putting them to
music and so
he has this genre that he calls meaning
wave and it's it's not like it's a huge
subculture but it's
it numbers in the tens of thousands and
he's had his success
completely underground because no
popular media ever
touches this and
you go on the websites i was just
interviewed by him
and he played some of the music and so
on um
on youtube every single comment is
unbelievably positive and uplifting in a
non-naive way
it's like these people they've cottoned
onto this music it's all positively
oriented and akira is trying very hard
to make it that way without being naive
and all these people are doing something
positive and they're all supporting each
other in the comments
it's like you think wow that's a youtube
comment list and there's hundreds of
them or thousands of them
it's so wonderful to see that and so you
we have these podcasts available to us
now so we can have these long-form
discussions right
so you and i we have some shared
expertise
we can talk about it as high level as we
can possibly manage
as honestly as we possibly can and as
engaging as
possible a manner and we can share it
with hundreds of thousands of people
it's like well that's a great deal man
it's great
and there's something about this
long-form communication that just
opens itself up to that and i've watched
the comments and people are happy about
two things they're happy about the
content
but they're happy about watching the
process
right and the process is more important
than the content
so we can model that balance that you
already talked about between plasticity
and stability we can model that in real
time
and that's a completely unethical issue
right as long as the
more you and i can listen to each other
and attend
and say what we believe to be true and
dance
the better the bloody podcast is going
to be
well this is obviously what i live i
live for these kinds of conversations
like we had today
but i don't feel one i don't feel like
everyone that i meet
is um coming at me with the same sort of
um
hey let's have a shared understanding of
the truth here let's get let's try to
let's
let's talk about this and get to it it's
some sort of uh
generalizable principle um i just feel
like
a lot of conversations um it's there's
kind of different
different energy in the conversation
where it's the like a lot of people are
lecturing at each other but not having
conversations with each other
and i don't know what to do with that i
don't know how when i get when i find
myself in a lecturing at situation
it takes me out of my comfort zone so
much that i don't
it's almost like someone's speaking
russian to me all of a sudden and i
don't understand russian
you know well i i can tell you what i
advise people to do under those
circumstances
the first is to realize that you are not
where you think you are
you're somewhere else that's that
feeling of being taken out
you're now you're somewhere else you
don't know where you are
okay that's fine you don't know where
you are what should you do
shut up that's the first thing
the person you're talking to is not
interested in your opinion
they're interested in something else you
don't know what it is but it's not your
opinion or your thoughts or your ideas
it's something else
then you watch attend it's like this is
a mystery
unfolding if you attend you'll see
what's happening
and you'll be able to react carefully
and
but the the crucial issue is to
recognize that you're not where you
because what you'll try to do is impose
your
desire on the situation you want this to
be the kind of conversation you just
described as long as you keep doing that
you actually lose
that's something i learned at least in
part from reading jung in depth
because he talked about how to handle
yourself in conversations
where something had possessed
the conversation essentially something
you didn't understand it possessed the
conversation
sometimes you the person you're talking
to is possessed by something
that wins if you argue it doesn't matter
if you what you argue about or what you
say or what the fact is if you engage in
the argument you lose
so but having said that i still think
the better alternative
all things considered is just to do a
better thing
not to have confidence model like model
something better you know i try
to explore while you're doing it yeah i
try so hard to model
um uh carl rogers notion of
unconditional positive regard
and i really try my i i can honestly say
i try my best to model that in my life
and
um it it does often get good results
well i can tell you what what i made of
that as a clinician
because i was never caught i was never
comfortable with that idea i didn't like
it
exactly i knew there was something to it
i what i didn't casually discard it
but it lacks differentiation
so if you're a clinician and someone
comes to you
there's a bunch of things in their life
that aren't right and
aren't good and there's a bunch of
things that could be promoted
and partly what you're doing is you're
you're on the sub you're on the side of
the part of
the person that wants to grow and
develop
and you're not on the side of the part
that doesn't
and you can make that explicit and
people are actually relieved by it and
you can say well
i'm going to make mistakes and in my
judgment and please correct me
but so the the contract the therapeutic
contract is
you're gonna come and i learned some of
this from rogers too so
so it came along with the unconditional
positive regard it's like
okay you and i are going to aim for
what's better
we're going to mutually just discuss
what's better so that
so that we agree that that's better and
then we're going to strategize about how
to go about
doing it and we're going to test the
strategies but that's the deal
another deal is part of that deal is
you're going to tell me what you
actually think
and i'm going to tell you what i
actually think that's that what did he
call that
congruence and was congruence and
honesty
and so you know if a client says
something that upsets me
i'll say um i just had this emotional
reaction to what you said
negative emotional reaction we should
take that apart
or if i observe that in them but it's
not unconditional positive regard
because
there's judgment there has to be you
want to
keep the wheat and throw away the chaff
and you want to participate in that
with with the people that now you could
say over
arching that is a benevolent motivation
and that motivation is i want you to be
better and i want you to be better so
that everyone else is better
that's fine but jung pointed out
that every ideal is a judge by necessity
and so you have to wrestle with that in
relationship to unconditional positive
regards
you know you just made me realize that i
don't think i practice unconditional
positive regard i think i practice
unconditional regard let's just take the
word positive out of there for a second
okay because there's something i try to
do with with any human who's in front of
me
and it's it's unconditional their past
their all the things that um you know
it's like i don't even want to know all
the things that came before this
conversation you know i want to see
someone on my with my own eyes freshly
you know i don't want to be influenced
by you know people will say like don't
talk to this person don't talk to that
person do you know what i mean
yeah i know exactly what you mean yep
yep oh that's why i was so fascinated by
by the ancient egyptian worship of the
eye
then the mesopotamians had it too their
greatest god marduk
was had eyes all the way around his head
and he spoke magic words
it's like yes that's exactly right but
what you're
you're saying is that that's a tension
it's a tension i want to watch and see
what's right in front of me
and it's not thinking it's something
completely different than that
and it's akin to what you just described
it's almost like it's almost like a
scientific perspective i want to see
what is
i i want to see what it is i don't want
to be colored by uh
so the egyptians regarded horus as the
revitalizing agent
osiris was the dead king right the the
worn out state the
the the no longer functional ideology
and horus was the eye
and it was the eye that was the
revitalizing source because it saw what
was
and replaced presumption with what was
and it's sort of
it's it's it's there watching to see and
being willing to see and certainly
that's an integral part of any real
scientific process
absolutely okay so let's let's cut off
the unconditional word then as well
i try to practice regard well then
there's two things you've got you've got
this regard which is
focused attention but then the
differentiation element is also
crucially important it's like well let's
figure out what's right here and what
isn't and
let's have a bunch more of what's right
and not so much of what isn't
and that should never be imposed and
that's something else i learned from
rogers is like
you can't you can't really give advice
to well to anyone for that matter but
certainly not to their to clinical
clients they have to be
fully bought in for it to work so
imposing it isn't going to help
you can you can't rip off the defense
mechanisms you can't rip them off people
it's a terrifying thing yeah well
that's yes but there's plenty for us to
be defended against
so i mean
though that that that fear you had let's
say
about being in conversations where you
don't know what the rules are
i mean what i observed among
undergraduates was that
continually was that that would be there
at a surface level
now and then but i could trust the
undergraduates by and large that if i
gave them something that was
substantive they'd be so excited and so
interested that it was just ridiculous
and so even that
ideological cynicism or resentment is
often relatively shallow
and and you can entice people away from
that with something better
i agree i i just like to tell you a
little about my personal experience
at columbia university i teach the
course called the science of living well
and you know i i just on the first day
of class i just
let uh i leaf at the door any kind of
ideology or
just all that crap basically you're all
welcome here like let's just start there
like you're all welcome in this class
and i care about
finding the greatest potentiality within
each and every one of you in this class
and and the way in the style that works
best for you and how you want to own
your
uh decide how you want to live your life
and then take responsibility
for that life and students love it i
mean i i don't there's no controversies
there's no
i mean it's what i love my students you
know they they
when you kind of frame it in that way i
mean um
students they're all on board there's no
reason to divide
there's no reason to kind of lead with
division in my in my point of view
you know i i agree and i've always
had faith in my undergraduate students
and they've always delivered on that
faith
like all every year
it was always the same and so um
if i was interested in what i was doing
and i found it meaningful and if i was
trying to get at the heart of things
they were
like completely along for the ride but
i've also found exactly the same thing
in the podcast and when i went on public
lectures it's like
you know i had discussions of this sort
i would say of this intensity
with sam harris for example about
religious matters and you know there
were 10 000 people watching that and
they were captivated by it well that was
how it appeared
and so you can trust that in people and
and well
what's been your experience with your
podcast and why something funny
yeah yeah regarding to the like i'll
tell you something funny i had a
four-hour debate with sam harris on my
podcast about the nature of free will
and he actually uh said to me in in in
an email i think i'm allowed to
allow to say what he said to me he said
what i'm a compatibilist
he said what i'm trying to do with my
compatibilist version of free will is
what
jordan peterson is trying to do with
trying to redefine god so he put me and
you in the same camp there
so in a way so um i think uh
you know we're on a similar frequency in
in some in some sense that uh i don't
want to
uh have such narrow conceptualizations
of something that no longer has
practical utility uh you know construct
value anymore
so tell me what's happening with your
podcast and why are you doing it because
i'm sure
you're an educator like me and now you
have the means this technological means
and so
what what have you experienced and what
do you want from it
you know my podcast has become uh
one of the greatest sources of meaning
in my life um it started seven years ago
as just me turning on the microphone i
wanted to have dirty conversations with
my colleagues
about psychology but it's really turned
into a different beast it's really
something's really emerged
uh which is which i'm really pleased
about and
and that's that i have a guest on my
show
who i treat with unconditional regard
and i don't i don't
i don't care who they are like i want to
engage
them um in the moment on ideas and
and try to come to some mutual
understanding of the truth i mean
i've had controversial guests on i've
had non-controversial guests on i don't
even like to think of it
in that way because none of the episodes
have been controversial
so it's almost like people say like oh
you're gonna have a controversial guest
on as though they're expecting that that
the episode need be controversial and
what i want to show is that doesn't need
to be
the case you know like it why does that
need to be like is there some rule from
like
moses 10 commands i think it's it's
it's cheap and fast yeah you know and
and
and i think some of that was actually
imposed
previously by our technological
limitations
like you know if you're if you're
trying to attract attention in a limited
bandwidth world
you need something flashy and quick
because
the attentional space is unbelievably
expensive and and you have to wave a
red flag but now we've got time
right we can let things unfold and so
you know i'm
i'm inviting political figures onto my
podcast and
i hope i can get people from across the
ideological spectrum
and and offer them the opportunity to
unfold their ideas
over two hours without sound bites and
without
uh the intermediation of the journalists
so to speak i'm going to ask questions
obviously but
and that's all become possible because
of this technological transformation and
i think it's gonna i had mike lee the
senator from utah who's i think the most
conservative
senator in the house according to his
voting record
um and he you know laid out his
his thoughts over two hours and what's
been so gratifying
is that the comments in the main
aren't foolish and knee-jerk on either
side of the political spectrum
they're more like oh would when he laid
out his arguments i found them
interesting and i learned a lot from
listening
and that's left wingers they're saying
that and right wingers are saying that
and
hooray and so it would be so nice as far
as i'm concerned
if that was how we conducted our
political discourse
it's like what's your ideas can you lay
them out over two hours and still be
there and still have something to say
and i've also found i don't know what
your experience is but
my experience with these long forms is
that they brutally punish
any facade or dishonesty of any sort
any editing misbehavior anything like
that
it just doesn't fly man it doesn't
happen what do you mean
what do you mean just can you unpack
that a little more well for example if i
put up
a uh a youtube video and i've cut some
of it
people are immediately skeptical about
what i've got yeah oh absolutely
absolutely i cut out i cut out a
bathroom break the other day and i
actually got youtube comments saying
what are you trying to hide
i was like well you know what you don't
want to hear me peeing
but um but have you found and i found
this to be the case that
if you if if i treat people as human
they tend to act human
i don't care who they are i mean i don't
care i i very rarely have i encountered
any anyone in my life
and i've encountered so-called
controversial figures that i'm that i'm
i'm supposed to even hate you know even
before talking to them
that if i if i treat them with humanity
they
at least engage me with humanity
that that's been in the main that's been
overwhelming
my experience are exceptions i have
i yeah and pronounced exceptions i mean
i've had
interviews with journalists that were
where
um i did the things that you just
described and
the consequence was that they wrote
something that was absolutely
deceitful and reprehensible and they
knew it
and that's been a continual shock to me
even though it's happened many many
times
so i would say almost all the time when
you invite someone to play
they play nicely but
not always not always and so
it's unfortunate right um that is
unfortunate
it it doesn't mean that we don't stop
trying a lot of damage no
well right i don't want to become like
an ultra cynic i guess is what i'm
trying to say
about humanity i want to keep my
humanistic there's no reason for that
yeah there's no reason for that it's
it's the data don't support the
conclusion i mean i've looked
very deeply into the problem of
malevolence and i've taken it very
seriously and i don't think that i'm
particularly naive
but it's still definitely the case that
your best bet is like
arms open and welcoming and even though
you know that that
invites in catastrophe now and then it's
still it's
it is the most appropriate ethical
stance
so so what do you think what do you
think is going to happen to the
universities in light of all this new
technological possibility
i mean yeah have you thought do your
thoughts go in that direction
you're an educator at an elite
university but now you have all this
technological power
it's like what what is what are the
consequences that gonna be
yeah i i tweeted out something along the
lines of my i predict that in
20 years or so i think i may have said
20 years um
universities will be considered very
archaic um and uh
and pointless to a large degree now i
got a lot of comments because that's
obviously a pretty uh uh uh superlative
statement but
i do think i am i am i i do think that
we're gonna look back at some point in
the future and and and think that
um you know the the sort of elitism of
the uh
of the educational structure that we
have at university is going to be
a bit silly considering there's so much
high quality information coming out
that's going to be accessible to so many
people and that so many people are going
to be learning things that
that they in which they do with their
lives not through a university and once
that starts happening and kind of the
tables get turned in a way where
the people in power and society to a
large degree are
if not if not self-taught but taught
through channels other than the most
elite universities i think that it's
that that things are going to look a bit
silly about the current structure
what do you think how did that land with
you well
it seems to me that
the landscape is going to transform
itself
so that people will turn to
further education to discussions like
the one that we just had
because why not right i mean i see
we we just conducted
something that approximates a high-level
graduate seminar
spontaneously i mean you've worked for
decades on these sorts of things and so
have i
i mean even as a professional in an
elite institution
i would say the opportunity to sit down
for two hours with another
respected figure in the field and have a
conversation like this are
relatively few and far between but now
you can do that
whenever you want assuming people will
accept your invitation and then you can
invite
like 500 000 people to take part so
how is that not just going to win it
i agree and and it's much more
interesting than the typical lecture
because the typical lecture is dull and
horrible
i mean you get exceptions to that but
generally that's the case
and i mean you go to an academic
conference and my god it's
it's it's so
no one would watch any of that almost
unless they had to and so
yeah that's just i can't compete i can't
go yeah i can't go back to columbia
in the fall after going a year of um you
know there's virtual classes i didn't
even partake in the virtual
but um when i come back in the fall to
in person classes
there's no way i'm going to go back to
business as usual it feels
so weird to to stand up there and
lecture the students
after i've experienced clubhouse and the
potential for that for i don't know if
you've discovered clubs but i think
that's going to be a
a big wave of the future um i
experienced you know the podcast format
i experienced
all these other formats of discussions
there's no way i can go back to the
typical lecture style so i'm actually
trying to reformulate exactly what a
classroom
what a science of living while classroom
even looks like
well i think that what will emerge too
though accreditation institutions will
emerge
you know increasingly the cost of
education will be driven down to
something approximating zero
and i think that's what that's how it
looks to me and i think we'll get
the people who really want to teach and
who are teaching something that people
want to listen to will be radically
successful at it
at an individual level primarily and
then there's the problem of
accreditation
and and perhaps universities will solve
that but i suspect not i suspect
upstart private companies will will will
solve that problem you know because you
can imagine a situation where
all the lectures are free but the exams
are very expensive and
almost no one passes them
so it's breadth of education but
strenuous
evaluation strenuous accurate evaluation
and then accreditation and the
accreditation would have some value it's
already the case
that you know if you hire someone from
harvard
part of what you're getting is the
initial entry process
right it's really hard to get into
harvard you have to be
you have to have a very high iq in so
far as the sats are you unless you're
one of these celebrities and you pay for
your dc that's what there's there's
there's exceptions
yeah but you're gonna have a of a
time if you go to the university
and you're you're not intellectually
qualified it's going to be a horrific
experience so your point is well taken
you're playing
self-punishing so you have to be very
very smart
and you have to have accomplished
generally three or four other things
so when you hire someone from an ivy
league institute because of the
stringent selection process which is
made possible at least in part by the
plethora of applicants
you know that regardless of the
educational quality you're getting a
person who had those attributes to begin
with
so it's a proxy for it's a proxy
for competent generosity all things
considered
and then the education adds something to
that but
but you can imagine that accreditation
institutions will pop up that
that are capable of assessing that and
there's real value in that i'd like to
do that but i i
i don't have the wherewithal to manage
it it's too complex
what i love about the competent that you
brought in the competent uh
uh relational aspect there is i mean
that's the highest level of integration
of my whole book like that's where i'm
that's where i'm i mean i feel like we
just like arrived at that like
independently but
um i mean that's that's well we've
thought along the same track too
that's true and there's enough
fertilization
that's very true that's very true but
you know if you ask me what is what is
transcendence
i don't define transcendence um as uh
uh as some sort of thing where you're
above other humans you know
in some sort of um i'm superior to other
human sort of way
but a very um it doesn't work i i define
it as a
it's called it a synergy between self
and world where you're and you could you
could frame in terms of competence
your competence is so um uh
influential and powerful in in making
the world a better place that there's
such little separation between you and
the world so that what's good for you
is good for the world and that's what i
that's what my book's trying to get to
so i i love that i believe that's true i
believe
that's true is that you can you can have
your cake and eat it too
and i think that the pleasure of
mentorship is really an example of that
it's like
well what would make you more happy than
anything else well who knows let's take
a look just out of curiosity well is it
a like is it a fast mercedes is it
is it like sexual gratification on
demand is it
wealth is it power is its status etc etc
and you can get more sophisticated than
that as well but my experience has been
that there isn't anything more
pleasurable than
seeing unrewarded talent and possibility
and
facilitating its development it's like
that's in its own universe and so
that's deeply meaningful to me but then
it's also something that's
clearly of high level social benefit and
so
i think as you do integrate in in your
sense
you integrate internally which is what i
recommend people do and concentrate but
at the same time you're
integrating things externally there's no
separation
there not fundamentally which is also
why cleaning up your room turns out to
be a very difficult act
you know there's impediments there that
you just don't realize and
to get you can't get your room in
perfect order without simultaneously
getting the world in perfect order
so so it's how you explain einstein's
desk then
[Laughter]
there can be periods of creative
disorder
right but it's not a consequence of
avoidance okay fair enough
because i always see that picture of
einstein you know like there's a famous
picture of him with his
his office was out of control sure well
yeah he probably knew where everything
in it was
right so there's that too it's like
order is not necessarily evident on the
surface
that's true so that's true so all right
well look that was
that was wonderful i appreciate the fact
that you took the time to talk to me and
it's good i'm glad we finally had a
chance to have a prolonged discussion i
wish you
good luck with your book transcend and
i hope that it has the effect that you
want it to have
and that your podcast does as well and
that
onward onwards and all of that thank you
and i hope this conversation
modeled what a conversation could be in
the world well we'll see
because people will tell us i guess they
will yeah i guess
i was interested in it so i i got in the
absorption
i got into the uh you know the
absorption aspect but yeah well that's
it
that's a killer marker isn't it you know
it really is
you're not assuming you're not too
corrupt what you're absorbed in is
perhaps what's most important
because why else would you be absorbed
in it so why can't we
assume that's a reliable marker or the
most reliable marker even
i think it is so yeah
all right great thanks jordan thanks
very much thank you
[Music]
you